---
layout: post
title: Advice for Undergrads
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 13 May 2011 -- Vienna, VA

My time at UVa has proven surprisingly useful. Not so long ago, I was a high school senior, counting out paths to a poorly defined ambition. I’ve learned a great deal since then, but the most important lessons were not at all what I would have expected as a high school student. And so I say ‘surprisingly’. What’s useful is not always obvious at first.

So how ought you to use your time in undergrad? In the most basic sense, I’d advise you to treat it as an optimization problem. How you follow though depends on what you want. For myself, I optimized on research. I did what I could to maximize the time I spent working on academic problems, with the end goal of moving on to grad school. Others might want to optimize on grades, social life, or simple interest (by which I mean finding the most interesting classes, and taking them). These are all reasonable choices.

Despite the variance in these choices, however, I think that the real way in which they impart value shares a common denominator. What you are paying for, in college, is not so much an education, as it is a series of interactions. (You are also paying for validation — in the mode of economic signaling — but put that aside for the moment.) College offers the unique advantage of giving you time to cultivate unusual experiences. So whatever your end goals are in undergrad, I’d advise you to seek out interesting people, and talk to them.

In my case, doing research lent itself well to these kind of interactions. Professors are likely some of the most ‘interesting’ people you will ever meet. Many of them are enormously one-sided, and this is precisely what makes them so fun to talk to. The common ‘averageness’ of the general population is largely filtered for at the level of tenure-track academic. So if you can, build friendly relationships with professors. You may come to know, and to think about, things that before you hadn’t appreciated as thinkable.

Professors are not the only interesting people on campus, however, and even if they were, doing research is not the only way to interact with them. In pure ‘mind-expansion’ value, some of the most useful conversations I’ve had are with non-computer science faculty. These people had no good reason to talk to me. Don’t be close-minded in who you seek out, and don’t rely on classes for these sort of interactions. I’ve learned more in one-on-one conversation then I have ever learned in class. It’s slightly unintuitive, but immersion within the world-views held by academics in entirely unfamiliar disciplines can be quite rewarding. The alienness of new ideas often makes old ones resonate with renewed fervor.

So where else can you cultivate these experiences? The next obvious place to look is among your peers. I haven’t had quite as much luck in this area — it’s almost a tautology that most of your peers will be ‘normal’, and thus less interesting — but even with this caveat, there is something to be said for exploring the typical college social life. Certainly, there are some number of people among your peers who it would be valuable to have as friends (in a phenomenological sense, or otherwise). I should mention that I do see a number of ‘friend-groups’ formed by circumstance (e.g. the people freshman-year dorm), and this is certainly not a bad thing, but I’d recommend you befriend people for reasons beyond the randomness of housing selection. Such friends may prove more valuable.

So my advice is twofold. Decide what you want, and optimize on it. But in the course of your optimization, seek out interesting experiences. Some of the most interesting (and useful) things to think about, you don’t even know are out there. The trick is to find them.