---
layout: post
title: The Artful Mastering of Goals
---

h1. {{ page.title }}

p(meta). 19 May 2011 -- Charlottesville, VA

I’ve been thinking lately about thinking: how optimally to construct mental frameworks and thought processes that will encourage long-run success. As part of this metacognition, I’ve thought about goals, and I’ve come to some unintuitive conclusions. While goals are wonderful things to have, goal-oriented thinking (if taken too far) can encourage an undesirable cognitive bias.

In other words, there is a danger to the mastering of goals. A goal is not the same as the motivation which brought it into existence, but is rather more precisely defined. This precision is what makes a goal useful — it provides an unambiguous measure of progress — but it also presents a subtle danger. In information theoretic terms, goals are lossy with respect to their motivating principles. Look at one goal, and it tells you little about why it exists, or what aspirations were its fundamental cause. So in setting goals, you lower a great abstraction — the nature of your self — into the veins of reality. Your goals are suggestive of what you are — to what you aspire — but they are not themselves you. And this is the danger. You can become so ruthless at achieving your goals that you abandon the underlying motivations which brought them into existence. You can master the how, but lose the why.

Consider this scenario. Being what you are, you decide to accomplish something. You set a goal, as originally determined by the character underlying your will. Over time, the goal becomes increasingly important. You become invested in it as a measure of progress. The goal is no longer the result of lowering an abstraction, but rather becomes the abstraction itself. You have replaced motivation with goal, and means with end. The broad and information-rich motivations of self are deposed by a precise definition of value. You have become more one-sided. The dimensions of your character, once formed with the complexity of a fractal, are shaved into neat and precise edges.

This illustration is in many ways extreme and ridiculous, but I think it holds a kernel of truth. It’s important to have goals, and I have many myself. Just don’t forget why you have them. Don’t forget what you are.